EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
it warm to room temperature.
• Pour the medication into the syringe. Unclamp o
release the tubing, and let the medication flow
through it by gravity. Never force liquids down
an NG tube. To control the flow of liquid, raise
or lower the syringe height, or pinch and release
the tube. Before the syringe empties completely
begin flushing the tube with 30 to 50ml water
for an adult and 20 to 25 ml water for a child. The
flushing will clear any medication on the sides o
the tube and the openings at the end of the tube
thereby preventing clogging.
• After administering the medication and water,
remove the syringe or funnel and clamp the tube
(leave the tube open for the patient having nausea
until the feeling stops). The patient should sit up
in bed for about 30 minutes or, if uncomfortable
lie on his right side with the head of the bed
partially elevated. Either position will aid stomach
emptying and prevent regurgitation.
• For medications that are needed to act longer in
the stomach, you can delay gastric emptying by
positioning the patient on her left side with the
head of the bed slightly elevated, and the NG tube
clamped for about 30 minutes.
• To withdraw the tube, ensure that it moves freely
otherwise flush with 30 ml normal saline. The
patient should sit upright and then slowly
withdraw the tube. The tube should be clamped
or folded with the non-dominant hand before
withdrawal. This is to prevent any fluid in the tube
from running down the patient’s throat and getting
into her lungs during withdrawal.
(c) Rectal Administration
The drug in solution (enema) or suppository
form is placed in the rectum. Drug diffusion
from the solution or release from the
suppository leads to absorption across the
mucosal surface of the rectum (bioavailability
= 100%). Absorption is slow, erratic, and often
incomplete. Bioavailability may be greater than
with oral administration because only one (the
superior haemorrhoidal vein) of the three recta
veins empties into the portal circulation. Drug
absorbed in the lower two-thirds of the rectum
enters the systemic circulation directly, by
passing the liver and any first-pass effects.
Rectal ointment may be applied to a sore or
inflamed rectum for its soothing, local effect.
Advantages
• A safe route for the patient who is vomiting,
unconscious, or unable to swallow.
• An effective route to treat vomiting.
• It doesn’t irritate the patient’s upper GI tract, as
some oral medications do.
• It avoids destruction of medication by digestive
enzymes in the stomach and small intestine.
• It avoids biotransformation in the liver because
drugs absorbed from the lower rectum by-pass the
portal system.
Disadvantages
• It may be uncomfortable and embarrassing for the
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
701
istration
patient.
• Rectal absorption may be irregular or incomplete,
depending on the patient’s ability to retain the
medication and on the presence of faeces in the
rectum. Rectal dosages of some medications may
be larger than oral doses due to the incomplete
absorption.
• It should be used with caution in cardiac patients
because it may stimulate the patient’s vagal nerve
by stretching his anal sphincters.
How to administer rectal medication
Drugs are administered rectally as rectal
ointments, suppositories or enemas for local or
systemic effects.
Suppository is a solid medication in a firm
base, such as cocoa butter, that melts at body
temperature. It should be stored in a refrigerator
before use to maintain firmness. It has both
local and systemic uses, e.g. analgesic,
astringent or antiemetic, laxative.
Ointment is a semisolid medication that may
be applied externally to the anus or internally
to the rectum using an applicator. It is used
mainly for the local effect, e.g. as antipruritic
or anti-inflammatory agent.
Enema is a liquid given as either a retention
enema (retained by the patient for at least 30
minutes or until absorbed) or a non-retention
enema (retained by the patient for at least 10
minutes and then expelled). Enemas given to
clean the lower bowel are not medicated.
Enemas are given for both local (e.g. astringent
or laxative) and systemic (e.g. sedative or
nutritive) effects.
• Assemble all the requirements together, which
may include the medication, the applicator, water-
soluble lubricant, linen saver pad, paper towels,
hand gloves or finger cots. For the enema, include
the enema solution and tubing, funnel or a bulb
syringe (without the bulb), gauze swabs, receiver,
enema soap/toilet soap, etc.
• Assist the patient to lie on her left side with her
upper leg flexed so the anus is visible. Provide
privacy for the patient. Place the linen saver pad
under the patient’s buttocks. Put on gloves or
finger cot as appropriate.
• Remove the suppository from the wrapper and if
it is too soft, place it under a cold running water
until it is firm or in a refrigerator for several
minutes. Lubricate the suppository as well as the
gloved index finger to prevent anal friction and
tissue damage during insertion.
• Ask patient to breath through the mouth to relax
the anal sphincter.
• Gently insert the suppository tapered end first and
use your gloved index finger to direct it along the
rectal wall toward the umbilicus and away from
the faecal mass. To avoid expelling the
suppository, for adult, insert as far as 10cm (4")
and in children or infants, 5 cm (2") or less. Then
withdraw your finger, and remove the glove by
turning it   inside out and place it on a paper towel.
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
702
Appendi
• To prevent the patient from expelling the
suppository, press the patient’s buttocks together
until her urge to defecate subsides.
• Advise the patient to retain the suppository for at
least 20 minutes. In case of laxative suppository,
ask the patient to defecate as soon as she feels an
urge.
• If inserting an ointment, attach the ointment tube
to the applicator and lubricate the applicator before
insertion. Follow the same precautions as above.
• For the enema, the solution should be warmed to
between 37.8º and 40.6ºC to avoid stimulating
peristalsis during administration. Lubricate the tip
of the tube and gently insert it about 4" (10.3 cm)
into the rectum directing it toward the patient’s
umbilicus as described above. Pour the warmed
solution slowly into the enema container or
syringe and remove the clamp on the tube. Allow
the solution to flow into the patient by gravity.
Rushing it by either pouring the solution faster or
raising the syringe height will increase the fluid
pressure in the rectum thereby stimulating the urge
to defecate. After administering all of the enema
solution, clamp the tubing and ask the patient to
take a deep breath before withdrawing the tube
gently but quickly. Do not allow the enema
container to be completely empty before you
clamp the tube or you may introduce air into the
rectum. As for suppository, hold the patient’s
buttocks together until the urge to defecate
subsides.
• Document the procedure and your findings.
Nursing considerations (Rectal
administration)
• Educate the patient on the procedure so as to gain
his co-operation.
• Because intake of food and fluid stimulates
peristalsis, insert a laxative suppository about 30
minutes before mealtime to help soften the feaces
in the rectum and facilitate defecation.
• Enema solution should not be too hot as it can
cause burns and it should not be too cold as it can
cause shock.
• Do not use antiseptic soap so as not to cause rash.
• Monitor the amount of fluid instilled and expelled
to assess for retention of enema fluid particularly
in patients with fluid and electrolyte disturbance.
• Retention enema should be given before meals as
food can stimulate peristalsis and make retention
difficult.
• Avoid giving enema to a patient while sitting as
the catheter can injure the rectal wall and also,
the enema solution will not flow high enough into
the colon thereby distending the rectum and
causing rapid expulsion of the solution.
DERMATOLOGICAL ROUTE
(a) Transdermal and Topical Administration
Transdermal
(percutaneous)
drug
administration is the placement of the drug (in
a lotion, ointment, cream, paste, or patch) on
the skin surface for systemic absorption. An
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
occlusive dressing or film improves systemic
drug absorption from the skin. Small lipid-
soluble molecules, such as nitroglycerine,
nicotine, scopolamine, clonidine, fentanyl, and
steroids are readily absorbed from the skin.
Drugs are applied topically to the skin for a
ocal effect. Topical route can be used for any
of the following purposes:
• To relieve itching (pruritus).
• To lubricate and soften the skin.
• To cause local vasoconstriction or vasodilatation.
• To increase or decrease secretions from the skin.
• To provide a protective coating for the skin.
• To apply an antibiotic or antiseptic to treat or
prevent infection.
Inunction is topical administration of drugs by
rubbing to create friction. Such drugs are not
readily absorbed through the epidermis but they
can be absorbed into the lining of the sebaceous
glands and sweat pores. Washing the area well
before the application enhances absorption.
Topical dosage forms include powder, lotion,
cream, ointment, liniment, and paste.
Advantages of topical drug administration
nclude a long duration of action and the ability
o remove the dosage form when it is no longer
needed.
Lotion is a suspension of insoluble powder in
water or an emulsion without powder, e.g.
Calamine lotion. It has soothing, cooling and
protective effect on the skin. It also gives
feeling of dryness. It may be poured on the
sterile gauze and patted onto the affected area.
Nursing considerations
• Shake the container well before using.
• Remove residue from the previous applications,
if ordered.
• To increase absorption in certain skin conditions,
warm the patient’s skin with heat packs or a bath
before applying.
• Apply medication to clean, dry skin.
• Thoroughly massage into the skin.
• After application, observe the patient’s skin for
local irritation.
Ointment is a semisolid preparation
characterized by its oleaginous nature. It is used
as emollient and protective barrier. It provides
prolonged medication contact.
Nursing considerations
• As for lotion, but ointment does not require
shaking before application.
• Apply thin layer of ointment to patient’s skin, and
rub it in well.
• Wear hand gloves when treating open wounds or
if large area is affected.
Cream is generally oil-in-water or water-in-
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
oil emulsion. It lubricates as a barrier.
Nursing considerations
As for lotion, but cream does not require
shaking before application.
Paste is a semisolid preparation characterized
by high content of solids. It reduces and repels
moisture, e.g. Zinc Oxide Paste, which is used
to protect excoriated skin areas from urine and
faeces.
Nursing considerations
• Apply medication to clean, dry skin.
• Cover medication to increase absorption and to
protect the patient’s clothing and bed linen.
Topical powders are intimate mixtures of dry
finely divided drugs and /or chemicals intended
for external use. They are usually applied to
protect the skin, promote skin drying, and
reduce moisture, maceration, and friction
Examples are talcum powders, antiseptic
powders, and mentholated powders. The
disadvantages of powders are that they do no
adhere to dry skin surfaces and tend to cake on
most surfaces. It is generally sprinkled on the
skin surface, usually after cleaning and drying
The area may be covered with a dressing. To
prevent inhalation of powder particles, instruc
patient to turn his head to one side during
application.
Liniment is a liquid that usually contains an
anodyne or a rubefacient. It is applied to
stimulate circulation to an area by
vasodilatation of the capillaries. Pour the
liniment on the affected area and rub the skin
with long, firm smooth strokes. The linimen
should be at room temperature as a cold one
can cause vasoconstriction of the area.
(b)  Buccal and sublingual administration
(Oral mucosa)
A tablet or lozenge is placed under the tongue
(sublingual) or in contact with the mucosa
(buccal) surface of the cheek (between the
cheek and the gums). This type of
administration allows a nonpolar, lipid-soluble
drug to be absorbed across the epithelial lining
of the mouth. After buccal or sublingua
administration, the drug is absorbed directly
into the systemic circulation, by-passing the
liver and any first-pass effects.
Advantages
• The drug is absorbed directly into the bloodstream
and takes effect quickly.
• It bypasses both the lower GI tract and portal
system, thereby protecting the drug from
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
703
istration
transformation in the stomach, small intestine, or
liver.
• The mucosal route is convenient and safe to use.
How to give medication by the sublingual
or buccal routes
The procedure is the same as for oral route.
The only difference is that the drugs in oral
route are swallowed while the drugs in these
two routes are left to dissolve on their own
under the patient’s tongue (sublingual) and
between the patient’s cheek and teeth (buccal).
In either case, caution the patient not to swallow
the tablet.
(c) Vaginal administration
Drugs are applied to the vagina with the aid of
an applicator in form of suppository, cream,
ointment, tablet or pessary, gel or foam. Drug
effects are usually local, but systemic
absorption does occur through the vaginal
mucosa. Systemic effects are usually side
effects rather than the desired therapeutic goal
How to administer vaginal medication
• Assemble all the requirements together namely
the prescribed medication (suppository, tablet or
pessary, cream, ointment, jelly or foam),
applicator, gloves, cotton balls, water-soluble
lubricant, perineal pads, drape, linen saver pad,
paper towel, receiver, soap and water.
• Inform the patient about the procedure and ask
her to urinate since a full bladder can make the
treatment uncomfortable. Privacy is essential for
the procedure.
• Fill the applicator with the prescribed amount of
medication and cover the tip of the applicator with
water or water-soluble lubricant to make insertion
easier.
• Assist the patient to lie on her back, with knees
flexed and legs spread apart. Place a linen saver
pad under the patient and a drape over her legs
leaving only her perineum exposed. Ensure
adequate lighting to be able to identify the vagina
orifice.
• Put on gloves. With the gloved nondominant hand,
part the labia and examine the perineum. If you
see any discharge, clean it using the cotton balls
soaked in soapy warm water. Then, gently inert
the applicator about 2" (5cm) into the vagina and
push the plunger to instill the medication. Remove
the applicator and place it on a paper towel or a
receiver for used instrument. Remove the gloves
by turning them inside out and place them on the
paper towel or receiver. Wash your hands.
• Tell patient to remain supine for 10-15 minutes
after the instillation; the hips may be elevated on
a pillow. The position will allow the melted
medication to flow into the posterior fornix.
Failure to remain in this position, the medication
will run out because the vagina has no sphincter.
Finally, apply a clean perineal pad and a T binder
if there is excessive
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
704
Appendi
drainage. A pant can be used to put it in place.
(d) Urethral administration (Bladder
irrigation)
Bladder irrigation is carried out on a physician’s
order, usually to wash out the bladder and /or
apply an antiseptic solution to the bladder
lining. This is done after bladder or prostate
surgery with retention catheters. Continuous
bladder irrigation may be prescribed to reduce
the possibility of clot formation or urinary tract
infection.
It can also be used to maintain bladder tone
intermittently.
A special catheter with three lumina is used.
One lumen is used to inflate the balloon, one
allows fluid into the bladder and one allows
fluid to flow out of the bladder.
How to administer continuous bladder
irrigation
It is a sterile procedure, so aseptic technique
should be used. In this procedure, a specified
solution mostly normal saline is allowed to drip
into the catheter from a bag attached to a tube
that is similar to that of I.V. infusion. This fluid
mixed with collecting urine will continuously
flow out of the bladder through the catheter
into the collection bag through the third lumen.
If intermittent irrigation is to be done, then a
clamp will be needed on the tube from the
solution container, which will be released and
specified amount of fluid is allowed to enter
the bladder. Drainage tubing is then clamped
to cause the solution to remain in the bladder
for a specified time, after which the clamp will
be released to let urine and solution drain out
from the bladder. This is to be repeated until a
desired result is gotten. In order to measure
urine output with these systems, the amount of
fluid infused (in flow volume) is subtracted
from the total amount collected to be able to
get the amount of urine.
Always make sure that the drainage collection
bag is emptied at regular intervals (as often as
a very 4 hours or as needed) in order to prevent
backflow of solution into the bladder, which
can cause infection.
Document the time, date and appearance of
drainage, and any complaints by the patient.
OPHTHALMIC, OTIC, NASAL, AND
LARYNGEAL ROUTES
(a) Ophthalmic administration
The drug in form ointment or drops is
administered onto the conjunctiva using sterile
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
echnique to avoid irritation or infection. The
effect is usually local with systemic side effects
occasionally occurring. Absorption into the
CNS may be a problem at times because of the
proximity of the eyes to the brain and the
ipophilic nature of ophthalmically active
medications. Hand gloves may be worn if there
s visible drainage from the eyes. Eye
medication is usually instilled into the eye’s
ower conjunctival sac with resultant
distribution throughout the tear film.
How to instill eye drops
Medication is applied to the eye either in form
of drops or ointment. All medications for use
n the eye must be labeled “ophthalmic
preparation “ (safe for use in contact with the
eye). They must be kept sterile and applied
aseptically to prevent eye infection.
The patient assumes a back lying position with
he head slightly hyper extended or can be in a
sitting up position with the head tilted
backwards and holds a tissue to soak up the
excess medication that leaves the eye.
The nurse wipes the lids and lashes gently from
nner to the outer canthus with a cotton ball
dampened with normal saline solution.
The nurse instructs the patient to look at the
ceiling, and then exposes the lower conjunctival
sac by placing several fingers on the patient’s
cheek just below the affected eye and drawing
he skin downward. Using a side approach, the
nurse brings a dropper filled with the eye
medication over the conjunctival sac and instills
he ordered number of drops in the center or
outer part of the lower conjunctival sac. The
dropper should be 1 or 2cm above the sac. The
dropper should touch neither the cornea nor the
mucous membrane of the conjunctiva sac. The
skin is permitted to return to its normal position,
and the patient asked to close the eye gently,
not squeeze it shut. Closing the eye spreads the
medication over the eyeball. With a cotton ball
or gauze swab, the nurse presses firmly on the
nasolacrimal duct for several seconds before
he eye is closed, to prevent medication from
running out of the eye down the duct.
Finally she wipes the eyelids gently from the
nner to the outer canthus to remove excess
medication and if necessary, applies an eye pad
and secures it with tape.
Instillation of eye ointment
The patient assumes the same position as for
eye drops and the nurse draws down the lower
id as described under the eye drop instillation.
Holding the ointment tube in the other hand,
he nurse approaches the eye from below, and
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
squeezes about 2 cm of ointment from the tube
onto the conjunctival sac, moving from the
inner aspect to the lateral aspect. The patien
closes the eye and moves it to spread the
ointment unless this is contraindicated.
Nursing considerations
• Caution patient against driving or operating
machinery if blurred vision, dizziness or
drowsiness occurs.
• Carefully check dosage of drugs as many are quite
small and over dosage is easily possible.
• Apply ointment as a thin ribbon onto the lower
conjuctival surface. Instruct patient to close eye
gently and massage area lightly.
• Keep ointment tube tightly closed to prevent
moisture absorption and loss of potency.
• Do not allow tip of dropper or ointment tube to
touch eyelid or any moist surface.
• Do not use more often than directed because
overdose resulting in systemic toxicity can occur
• Apply ointment at bedtime if possible to avoid
daytime blurring of vision.
(b) Otic administration
Solutions are applied to the ear in form of
eardrops or irrigation for local therapeutic
activity (such as an anti-inflammatory or anti
infective effect). The ear is irrigated to clear
blockage of the auditory canal.
How to instill eardrops
Some ear instillations are used to treat diseases
of bacterial or fungal origin, or to relieve pain
or to soften cerumen (wax). Eardrops should
be at room temperature when administered. A
cold substance placed in the ear can affect the
equilibrium of the body so drastically that the
person may vomit from the sudden spinning
sensation he experiences. It can cause acute
pain from the membrane contraction. All ear
medications are marked “Otic Solution”
Remember to include three safety checks for
medicine identification.
Gather all the requirements needed: the
prescribed medication, the medicine dropper
gauze swab or cotton wool. The patient assumes
a side-lying position with the ear being treated
uppermost. The nurse wipes the externa
meatus with a cotton tipped applicator and
straightens the ear canal as follows: for adult
gently pull the pinna up and back; for a child
under 3 years, gently pull the pinna downward
and backward. Following the instillation, the
tragus of the ear is pressed two or three times
to move the drops inward, unless
contraindicated. The patient remains in the side
lying position for about 5 minutes. This position
prevents the drops from escaping and allows
medication to reach all sides of the ear canal
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
705
istration
A small piece of cotton fluff may be inserted
loosely into the meatus of the auditory canal
for 15 to 20 minutes to keep the medicine in
place unless otherwise instructed.
How to irrigate the ear
Irrigating the ear involves washing the external
auditory canal with a stream of solution to clean
the canal of discharges, to soften and remove
impacted cerumen, or dislodge a foreign body.
Sometimes, irrigation aims at relieving
localized inflammation and discomfort. The
procedure must be performed carefully to avoid
causing the patient discomfort or vertigo, to
prevent maceration of tissue that lines the canal,
and to avoid increasing the risk of otitis externa.
Because irrigation may contaminate the middle
ear if the tympanic membrane is ruptured, an
otoscopic examination always precedes ear
irrigation.
This procedure is contraindicated when a
vegetable foreign body such as a pea, a bean,
or a corn obstructs the auditory canal. These
foreign bodies are hygroscopic, that is, they
attract and absorb moisture. In contact with an
irrigant or other solution, they swell, causing
intense pain and complicating removal of the
object by irrigation. The procedure is
contraindicated also if the patient has a cold,
fever, ear infection, or an injured or ruptured
tympanic membrane.
• Assemble all the equipment including ear
irrigation syringe, otoscope, prescribed irrigant,
large bowl, linen saver pad and bath towel, emesis
bowl or big receiver, cotton balls or cotton tipped
applicators, 4 x 4 gauze swab, angle poised lamp,
container for irrigant. Wear gloves if you expect
contact with infected matter.
• Select the appropriate syringe and obtain the
prescribed irrigant. Put the container of irrigant
into the large bowl filled with hot water to warm
the solution to body temperature (37ºC). Avoid
extreme temperature changes because they can
affect inner ear fluids causing nausea and
dizziness.
• Test the temperature of the solution by sprinkling
a few drops on your inner wrist. Inspect
equipment, e.g. syringe for breaks or cracks;
inspect all metal tips for roughness.
• Explain the procedure to the patient; provide
privacy. Wash your hands and put on gloves (if
necessary).
• If you haven’t already done so, use otoscope to
inspect the auditory canal to be irrigated.
• Help the patient to a sitting position. To prevent
the solution from running down his neck, tilt his
head slightly forward and toward the affected side.
If he can’t sit, have him be on his back and tilt his
head slightly forward and toward the affected ear.
• Make sure that you have adequate lighting.
• If the patient is sitting, place the linen saver pad,
covered with bath towel on his shoulder and upper
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
706
Appendi
arm, under the affected ear. If he’s lying down,
cover his pillow and the area under the affected
ear.
• Have the patient hold the receiver or emesis basin
close to his head under the affected ear.
• To avoid getting foreign matter into the ear canal,
clean the auricle and the meatus of the auditory
canal with a cotton ball moistened with normal
saline or the prescribed irrigating solution.
• Draw the irrigant into the syringe and expel any
air.
• Straighten the auditory canal; then insert the
syringe tip and start the flow.
• During the irrigation, observe the patient for signs
of pain or dizziness. If he reports either, stop the
procedure immediately.
• When the syringe is empty, remove it and inspect
the return flow. Then refill the syringe and
continue the irrigation until the return flow is clear.
Never use more than 500ml of irrigant during the
procedure.
• Remove the syringe and inspect the ear canal for
cleanliness with the otoscope.
• Dry the patient’s auricle and neck. Remove the
bath towel and linen saver pad. Help the seated
patient lie on the affected side with the 4”x 4”
gauze pad under his ear to promote drainage of
residual debris and solution.
• Discard all the disposables, put away all
equipment, and remove the gloves and record the
date, time of irrigation. Also note the volume and
the solution used, the appearance of the canal
before and after irrigation, the appearance of the
return flow, the patient’s tolerance of the
procedure, and any comments he made about his
condition, especially regarding his hearing acuity.
(c) Nasal administration
The drug contained in a solution or suspension
is administered to the nasal mucosa, either as
spray or as drops. Onset is generally rapid, but
bioavailability can be variable and depends on
the condition of nasal membranes. The
medication may be used for local (e.g., nasal
decongestants, intranasal steroids) or systemic
effects. The duration of action may be from
minutes to hours, depending on the drug.
How to administer nasal drugs
Nose drops and sprays should be at room
temperature when administered, for greatest
comfort. Be certain to maintain three
identification safety checks with both types.
They are instilled for their astringent effect (to
shrink swollen mucous membranes) or to treat
infections of the nasal cavity or sinuses. The
equipment required is the medication solution,
which usually comes in a bottle with an
attached dropper, disposable tissues, and a tray.
Prior to the instillation, the patient blows the
nose to clear the nasal passages.
The patient assumes a back-lying position. For
treating the opening of the Eustachian
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
(auditory) tube, the patient can assume a dorsal
recumbent position. The drops flow into the
pharynx, where the Eustachian tube opens. To
reat the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses, the
nurse has the patient assume a back-lying
position with the head over the edge of the bed
or a pillow under the shoulders so that the head
s tipped backward. This is known as PROETZ
position. To treat the maxillary and frontal
sinuses, the nurse has the patient assume the
same back-lying position with the head turned
oward the side to be treated. This is called
PARKINSON position. She makes sure that the
patient is positioned so that the correct side is
accessible if only one side is to be treated. If
he patient’s head is over the edge of the bed, it
must be supported by the nurse’s hand so that
he neck muscles are not strained.
Once the patient has assumed the correct
position, the nurse administers the drops. The
dropper is held just above the nostril, and the
drops are directed toward the midline of the
superior concha of the ethmoid bone as the
patient breathes through his mouth. If the drops
are directed toward the base o f the nasal cavity,
hey will run down the Eustachian tube. The
mucous membranes of the nostrils should not
be touched to avoid injury to tissue and
contamination of the dropper. The patient will
remain in the position earlier mentioned for 5
o 10 minutes so that the solution will flow into
he desired area. After the drops are instilled,
ask him to “sniff” or attempt to move the
medication back into the deep recesses of his
nasal cavity.
The nurse will discard the medication
remaining in the dropper before returning the
dropper to the bottle.
How to give nose drop to an infant
To administer nose drops to an infant, the nurse
places a pillow under the infant’s shoulders and
allow the child’s head to fall back slightly over
he edge of pillow onto the nurse’s arm; this
arm can also be used to restrain the infant’s
arm. The other hand can be used to administer
he nose drops.
How to use a nasal aerosol device
This is also known as nebulization.
Nebulization therapy is also referred to as
nhalation therapy or aerosol therapy. It is used
n the nose mainly to treat inflamed nasal
passages. Nasal aerosol devices are available
n different designs and materials.
Ask the patient to gently blow her nose to
remove excess mucous and clear the nostrils.
Shake the aerosol device well and remove the
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
protective cap from the adapter tip. Get the
patient to place the tip in her nostril, hold her
breath and then firmly press down once on the
cartridge, and release it. Encourage her to
continue to hold her breath for several seconds
afterwards to avoid inhaling the mist. After
removing the device from her nostril, let her
exhale through the mouth and then repeat the
procedure for the other nostril, if ordered
Instruct the patient not to blow her nose for a
least 2 minutes after each spray.
Administration of aerosol medication carries
the same responsibility, as does the
administration of other forms of medication
Check the drug label three times as with other
preparations to be certain that you are giving
the right medication. The patient should be
instructed carefully on the use of the aeroso
device and should be cautioned that she should
use only as prescribed.
(d) Laryngeal administration
The drug in form of solution is applied as
mouthwash or gargle. Mouthwash provides
clean oral feeling. It can be used by patients
who cannot clean their mouths by themselves
It may be used after the normal brushing of the
teeth to prevent halitosis. It is also used for
patients with throat problems.
How to administer a mouthwash or gargle
Gather all the requirements namely the solution
drinking cup, emesis basin, mackintosh and a
towel preferably patient’s, etc. For unconscious
patient, mouth gag is needed or padded spatula
with an angle poised lamp or torchlight
It is a clean procedure. Inform patient abou
the procedure in order to gain his consent.
Prepare the required lotion as ordered.
Preferably the patient should sit upright if the
state of health permits.
Place the mackintosh and the towel around the
neck. Position the receiver under the angle of
chin. Assist him to rinse out mouth but if the
patient is unconscious, it is a little bit difficul
to clean behind of the teeth; there may be need
for mouth gag, and somebody to hold the pen
torch for you. Artery forceps or mounted swabs
may be used. They are dipped in the solution
and used until the mouth is clean. After this
the prepared solution can be given to rinse the
mouth. Patient should not swallow the solution
but should spit it into the emesis basin. Note
that this cannot replace toothbrush.
In case a patient needs a gargle, e.g. a patien
with tonsillitis or who has just done
tonsillectomy, seat him upright with his head
erect or tilted back slightly. Then pour the lotion
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
707
istration
and ask the patient to gargle with it, making
sure the essential parts are touched before
spitting the lotion out. This is done more than
once before stoppage. The solution should be
warm.
Nursing Considerations
• This cannot replace good tooth brushing as routine
oral care; does not clean plaque from teeth.
• It should be done for patient thrice a day especially
unconscious patient and patient with milk diet.
• Educate patient on the importance of oral care.
• Observe the rules of oral medication e.g. do not
give more than required.
RESPIRATORY ROUTE
(a) Pulmonary inhalation
The drug, as liquid or solid particles, is inhaled
into the lungs, where the site of action may be
local (e.g., beclomethasone) or systemic (e.g.,
inhalation anaesthetics).
Absorption is generally rapid, because of the
vascular nature of the pulmonary capillary
system, but it depends on drug lipophilicity,
droplet or particle size, pulmonary function,
and respiratory status.
Most systemic inhaled drugs are generally short
acting (minutes to hours) and may be eliminated
by the lungs. Locally acting inhaled drug
generally have longer duration of action and
may last from 2 to 12 hours or more.
The drug is inhaled perorally with a nebulizer
or metered-dose inhaler. Factors such as the rate
and depth of inhalation, length of time that the
breath is held after inhalation and placement
of the inhaler mouthpiece into the mouth can
affect the bronchial concentration of inhaled
medications.
How to use a metered-dose inhaler
For the proper use of the pressurized metered–
dose aerosol inhalers, use the following
procedure:
• Shake the aerosol canister before each use and
remove the cap.
• Hold the inhaler about 2 inches from an open
mouth or inhale the medication through a four–
inch paper tube spacer placed on the end of the
actuator in order to enhance the amount of
medication reaching the bronchial receptors.
• Tilt your head back slightly to form as straight a
channel as possible to maximize the dept of airway
penetration by the drug.
• Breathe out fully but normally.  The dose of the
drug will be more uniformly distributed in the
lungs when inhaled after a normal exhalation.
• Breathe in deeply and slowly over 4-5 seconds
while simultaneously depressing fully the top of
the metal canister. A fourteen-fold higher
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
708
Appendi
concentration of the drug will be deposited in the
lung after a slow 4-5 second inhalation (0.5 L/
sec) as compared to a fast 1-2 second inhalation
(2.0 L/sec) because more drug reaches the airways
instead of impacting on the large airways.  The
dept of inhalation also enhances the amount of
drug retained by the lung.
• Hold your breath for about 5-10 seconds after
inhalation to prevent exhaling particles of drug,
which would normally deposit in the lung due to
gravitational effects.
• Allow 5-10 minutes for the first inhaled dose to
take effect and repeat the above procedure if a
second inhalation is prescribed.
• Clean the inhaler thoroughly; remove the metal
canister and rinse the plastic case and cap
thoroughly under running water at least once a
day.
• Dry the plastic case and cap; and put the metal
canister back into the case with a twisting motion,
and then put the cap back on.
• Do not store the inhaler near heat or an open flame
because its contents are under pressure.
(b) Endotracheal (ET) tube administration
In an emergency, if I.V. access isn’t available,
certain drugs can be administered through an
ET tube. It allows uninterrupted resuscitation
and avoids such complications as coronary
artery laceration, cardiac tamponade, or
pneumothorax, which can occur with
intracardial administration of emergency
medication. The effect of a drug after ET
administration is more prolonged than after I.V.
administration because absorption is sustained
in the alveoli (depot effect). Repeat doses and
continuous infusions should therefore be
adjusted to prevent adverse reactions.
PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION
ROUTES
(a) General guide to parenteral route
Parenteral routes commonly used by nurses to
administer medications are intradermal,
subcutaneous and intramuscular. In some
settings, nurses also give intravenous
medications, although the type of medication
a nurse can administer by this route may be
restricted by the hospital policy. Parenteral
medications are absorbed more quickly than
oral medications and are irretrievable once
injected. Therefore, it is important that they be
prepared and administered carefully and
accurately. Preparing and administering
parenteral medications often involve mixing
drugs,
preparing
powdered
drug
(reconstitution) and employing sterile
techniques.
Equipment
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
Syringes are devices for injecting,
withdrawing, or instilling fluids. There are
several kinds of syringes used for injections.
Three commonly used types are:
1. The standard hypodermic syringe
2. The insulin syringe
3. The tuberculin syringe
Most syringes used today are made of plastic,
and are individually packaged for sterility, and
can be disposed of together with the needles
after use.
Hypodermic syringes come in 2 ml/cc, 2.5 ml/
cc, 5 ml/cc, 10 ml/cc, 20 ml/cc and 50 ml/cc.
These syringes usually have two scales marked
upon them, the minim and the milliliter scale.
The milliliter scale is normally used; the minim
scale is used for very small dosages.
Insulin syringes are similar to hypodermic
syringes except that they have a specially
designed scale for insulin. They have unit
graduations (100 units/ml) rather than volume
graduations. They are available in disposable
and non-disposable types.
Tuberculin syringe was designed to administer
uberculin. It is narrow and calibrated in tenths
and hundredths of a milliliter (up to 1 ml) on
one scale and in sixteenths of a minim (up to 1
minim) on the other scale. This syringe can also
be used to administer other drugs, particularly
when small or precise measurement is
ndicated, e.g. infant dosage.
Prefilled syringes contain premeasured, ready-
o-dispense doses enclosed in plastic cartridges
hat need only the attachment of a needle to be
ready for use.
Prefilled cartridges are ready-to-use
parenteral packages, which consist of a plastic
cartridge holder and a prefilled medication
cartridge with a needle attached. The
medication is premixed and premeasured.
All syringes have three parts:
• the TIP of the syringe, which connects with the
needle;
• the BARREL or outside part, on which the scales
are printed;
• and the PLUNGER or PISTON, the part that fits
inside the barrel.
Needles are stainless steel or aluminium
devices that penetrate the skin for the purpose
of administering or transferring a parenteral
product. They are usually disposable. A needle
has three parts: the HUB, which fits onto the
syringe; the CANNULA or SHAFT, which
connects to the hub; and the BEVEL which is
he slanted part at the tip of the needle. A long
bevel provides a sharp needle, used for
subcutaneous and intramuscular injections.
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
Short bevels are used for intravenous
injections; a long bevel is not used because i
might become occluded if it rests against the
side of a blood vessel.
Needles have three variables: the slant of the
bevel; the length of the shaft, which varies from
¼ to 5 inches and the gauge or diameter of the
shaft, which varies from 14 (largest diameter
to 27 gauge. The larger the gauge, the smaller
the diameter of the cannula.
For subcutaneous injections, it is usual to use
a 24 to 26-gauge needle, 3/8 to 5/8 inch long
Obese patients require 1-inch needle.
For intramuscular injections, a longer needle
with a larger gauge is used, for example, 20 to
22 gauge and 1 to 1½ inches long.
Selection of needles depends on the viscosity
of the medicine that will be given. Blood is
thick, so 18 and 19 gauge needles are generally
used to withdraw blood; antibiotics are fairly
thick and so are usually injected through a 20
gauge needle; water based medications are
injected through a 22 or 25 gauge needle
Always try and use the smallest gauge and the
shortest length possible in order to reduce
client’s discomfort and increase the ease of
administration. At times, the infants may need
a fairly large gauge in case you want to
administer antibiotics but a fairly short needle
(1 inch).
Intradermal injections are very shallow and thus
require a very short needle (½ or 5/8 inch) if
the solutions are water-based, and a gauge of
25 or even 27 can be chosen.
Ampoules are frequently used to package
parenteral medications. An ampoule is a glass
container that usually holds a single dose of a
drug. It is made of glass and has a constricted
neck. Some ampoules have coloured marks
around their necks and some are scored. If the
neck is not prescored, it is scored with a razor
blade before opening. Often the drug is in the
upper stem of the ampoule above the neck and
as well as in the main portion of the ampoule
the upper part is flicked several times with
fingernail to bring the medication to the main
portion of the ampoule. To open it, you place
sterile gauze on top of the ampoule and break
the neck off by bending it outward. The sterile
gauze protects the nurse’s fingers from the
glass. A hypodermic needle is inserted to
remove the medication from the bottom of the
ampoule, and might need to tilt the ampoule to
obtain all the medication incase of a single dose
ampoule.
Vial is a small glass bottle sealed with a rubber
cap. It may contain a single dose but most often
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
709
istration
contain multidoses, e.g., 50ml of a drug. Vials
usually have a metal cap that protects the rubber
seal; the cap is readily removed. Before
withdrawing the medication from a vial, the
nurse swabs the rubber cap with an alcohol, or
methylated spirit. Then the nurse draws into
the syringe the volume of air equals to the
amount of medication to be withdrawn; inserts
the needle into the vial through the rubber cap
and injects the air into the vial. The air prevents
a negative vacuum and allows the medication
to be withdrawn easily. The bevel is kept above
the medication to avoid creating bubbles. The
prescribed amount of drug is then withdrawn
into the syringe by inverting the vial, holding
it upward at eye level, and pulling back the
plunger.
(b) Preparing medication for injection
Parenteral medication may be in form of a
liquid or powder. Liquid medications are
available in glass ampules or vials and are ready
to draw into a syringe. Solutions of drugs for
parenteral administration may also be further
diluted before administration.
Dry powders of parenteral drugs for
reconstitution are used for drug products that
are unstable as solutions. Correct diluents must
be used for such reconstitution.
Reconstitution of a dry powder from vial
• Assemble the required equipment. Select the
appropriate needle size and syringe; the syringe
should be slightly larger than the volume required
for reconstitution.
• Remove the protective cap from the diluent vial
and wipe the stopper with alcohol; allow the
alcohol to evaporate.
• Inject an amount of air equal to the recommended
amount of diluent into the diluent vial; then draw
the recommended amount of diluent into the
needle and syringe.
• Wipe the surface of the medication vial with
alcohol, allow to dry and then inject the diluent
into the vial.
• Roll the vial or shake it gently to allow the powder
to dissolve.
• After the powder has dissolved, the vial is inverted
and the desired volume is withdrawn.
Removing liquid medication from an
ampoule
• Hold the ampoule upright, and tap the top to
remove any solution trapped there.
• Score the neck of the ampoule with a razor blade
if it is not prescored. Then, swab the neck of the
ampoule with an alcohol swab.
• Grasp the ampoule on each side of the neck with
thumb and index finger of each hand and quickly
snap open.
• Place a filter needle in the open ampoule and
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
710
Appendi
withdraw the prescribed dose.
Removing drug solution from a vial
• Remove the protective cap around the rubber
stopper on the vial and clean the stopper with
alcohol; allow to dry.
• Ensure that appropriate needle size and syringe
are used.
• Pull back the plunger until the amount of air in
the barrel equals the amount o f medication
ordered.
• Insert the needle into the vial stopper, inject the
air, and withdraw the medication.
• The air is injected into the vial to prevent a
negative vacuum from being created and to allow
the drug to be removed.
(c) Precautions for safe parenteral injection
Wrong injection of a drug may damage nerves,
tissues, or blood vessels, or introduce bacteria
into the bloodstream. To avoid such
complications:
• Be sure you are injecting the right patient.
Injection into a wrong patient can have immediate
and fatal consequences. Also follow the three
safety checks to be certain that you are injecting
the right drug.
• Select the site carefully to avoid damaging nerves
and vessels.
• Avoid areas that are inflamed or have lesions, hair
or birthmarks.
• Use only sterile needles and syringes and avoid
contamination.
• Select the right needle and syringe sizes for the
medication and the patient’s size.
• Check for blood backflow to ensure placement in
a vein before I.V. injection. For S.C., I.M., and
intradermal injections, remove the needle if you
see blood in the syringe barrel. Select another site
and try again with a new needle.
• Rotate injection sites for frequent injections and
record such sites in the patient’s medication chart.
• All materials used should be discarded properly.
(d) Parenteral routes
The various routes of administration of
parenteral medications include:
1.
INTRADERMAL ADMINISTRATION
An intradermal (intracutaneous) injection is the
administration of drugs into the dermal layer
of the skin just beneath the epidermis. Usually
only a small amount of liquid is used, e.g. 0.1
ml. The maximum injection volume is
approximately 1 ml. This method of
administration is frequently indicated for
allergy and tuberculin test and for vaccinations.
Common sites for intradermal injections are the
inner lower arm, the upper chest, and the back
beneath the scapulae.
Procedure for intradermal injection
• The equipment normally used is a 1 ml syringe
calibrated into hundreds of a milliliter. The needle
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
is short and fine, frequently a 25, 26 or 27 gauge,
¼ inch to 5/8 inch long.
• Inform patient about the procedure; gather all you
will need. Maintain privacy if necessary.
• Prepare the injection and take it to the patient’s
bedside.
• Arrange patient in a position that will suit the
procedure. Clean the site with an alcohol pad and
allow to dry. Injection while the skin is still wet
can introduce antiseptic into the dermis, which
can cause skin irritation and affect test results.
• Hold the patient’s forearm and stretch the skin
with your thumb. With your other hand, hold the
syringe between your thumb and forefinger and
expel any air in the needle.
• Position the needle at about 15º angle to the skin
with the bevel of the needle upward. The bevel is
thrust through the epidermis into the dermis, and
then the fluid is slowly and gently injected. The
needle is correctly placed if you feel some
resistance while injecting the medication. But if
the plunger moves too freely, you have inserted
the needle too deeply; withdraw slightly and try
again.
• After injecting the medication, leave the needle
momentarily in place and observe for a small
blister or wheal to form. The needle is then
withdrawn quickly, and the site is very lightly
wiped with an antiseptic swab. The area is not
massaged because the medication may disperse
into the tissue or out through the needle insertion
site. Massaging may also interfere with the test
result. Intradermal injections are absorbed slowly
through blood capillaries in the area.
• Document the name of the medication and the
amount administered. Observe the patient for
allergic reaction and notify the physician
accordingly.
2.
SUBCUTANEOUS ADMINISTRATION
It is the injection of drug into the subcutaneous
issue beneath the skin layers, usually of the
arm or thigh (bioavailability <100%). It is also
referred to as hypodermic injection. This
method of administration has a number of
advantages. The drug is almost completely
absorbed from the tissues, provided that blood
circulation is normal. Thus, the amount of drug
absorbed is predictable. The patient’s state of
consciousness or ability to swallow does not
affect subcutaneous injection. The drug
administered in this route generally acts within
30 minutes. The chief disadvantage of this
method, as is true of all methods of parenteral
administration is that the skin is broken by the
nsertion of a needle. Any break in the skin
poses the risk of infection, particularly if aseptic
echnique is not adopted.
The common sites used for a subcutaneous
njection are usually the outer upper arms or
he anterior thighs. These are convenient sites
for injections and they normally offer adequate
area and have satisfactory circulation. Patients
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
who administer their own injections, e.g. those
with diabetes mellitus, usually use the
subcutaneous tissue of the anterior thighs and
abdomen. Sites on the upper back below the
scapulae are also used when administering
subcutaneous injections. It is advisable to
alternate sites if a patient is taking or receiving
a number of injections; a site rotation plan
should be devised.
S.C. injection should be avoided if:
1)The patient is in shock or has occlusive vascula
disease with poor perfusion.
2)The patient’s skin tissue is grossly adipose,
oedematous, hardened, or swollen at all the
common injection sites.
3)The patient’s skin is diseased, or damaged by
previous injections
Adverse effects:
1)Injection of concentrated or irritating solutions
can cause sterile abscesses to form as a result of
natural immune response.
2)Repeated injections into the same site can cause
lipodystrophy, atrophy of the S.C. tissue. Diabetic
patients who require daily injections of insulin
should have planned rotation of injection sites to
minimize tissue damage.
Procedure for subcutaneous injection
• Wash hand using a surgical hand wash before
assembling the supplies to avoid transmitting
microorganisms to the patient or to the sterile
equipment.
• Gather the following requirements:
•
The patient’s medication card or list
•
The injection pack containing a galipot for
lotion with cotton swabs
•
A vial or ampoule of the correct sterile
medication
•
A sterile syringe and needle. Generally a 2ml
syringe and a 25-gauge needle are used for
subcutaneous injections. The length of the
needle depends on the amount of adipose tissue
and the angle used to administer the injection
Generally, a 5/8 inch needle is used for adults
when the injection is administered at a 45º
angle; a ½ inch needle is used at a 90º angle.
Shorter needles, e.g. 3/8 inch, may be used fo
children and longer ones, e.g. 1 inch, may be
necessary for very obese adults. To determine
the appropriate length of the needle for a 90º
angle injection, pinch a fold of skin between
your thumb and forefinger at the injection site
and then measure the width of the skin fold by
placing a needle that will not be used for
injection against the skin surface. The
appropriate needle length is one half the width
of the skin fold (Pitel, 1971). When this method
of measuring is used, the needle is inserted
without pinching the skin.
•
Disinfectant to clean the top of the medication
vial and the injection site.
• After withdrawing the required dosage, cover the
needle to maintain sterility. Place the syringe in
the receiver. Dispose the ampoule and any unused
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
711
istration
solution.
• Identify the patient and explain the procedure.
Select a site free of tenderness, hardness, swelling,
scarring, itching, burning or localized
inflammation. Select a site that has not been used
frequently. These conditions could hinder the
absorption of the medication. These signs could
also increase the likelihood of an infection at the
injection site. Provide privacy.
• Clean the site with an antiseptic swab. Start at the
center of the site and clean in a widening circle.
Allow the area to dry thoroughly. Place the swab
between the third and fourth fingers of the non-
dominant hand for later use.
• Remove the needle cap while waiting for the
antiseptic to dry. Pull the cap straight off to avoid
contaminating the needle.
• Expel any air bubbles from the syringe by
inverting the syringe and gently pushing on the
plunger until a drop of solution can be seen in the
needle bevel. If air bubbles still remain, flick the
side of the syringe barrel. Alternatively, when it
is important that the entire amount of medication
be administered, leave 0.2 ml of air in the syringe
(Wong, 1982).
• Take the syringe in your dominant hand by holding
it between your thumb and fingers with your palm
facing upward for a 45ºangle insertion or with the
palm downward for a 90ºangle insertion.
• Using a non-dominant hand, pinch or spread the
skin at the site, and pierce it with the bevel upward
for 45º angle using a firm steady push. When the
needle is inserted, move your non-dominant hand
to the barrel of the syringe and your dominant hand
to the end of the plunger.
• Aspirate by pulling back on the plunger. If blood
appears in the syringe, withdraw the needle,
discard the syringe, and prepare a new injection.
If blood does not appear, inject the medication by
holding the syringe steady and depressing the
plunger with a slow even pressure.
• Remove the needle quickly, pulling along the line
of insertion and supporting the tissue with your
non-dominant hand.
• Massage the site lightly with a sterile disinfectant
soaked swab or apply slight pressure.If bleeding
occurs, apply pressure to the site until it stops.
Bleeding rarely occurs after subcutaneous
injection.
• Dispose the used needles and syringe. Needle
covers should be re-applied
• Assist patient to a comfortable position
• Wash hands
• Record the medication given, dosage, time, route,
and any complaints by the patient, and your
signature.
• Assess the effectiveness of the medication 15 to
30 minutes after the injection or as appropriate,
depending on the medication.
Guidelines for Heparin Administration
The subcutaneous administration of heparin
requires special precautions because of its
anticoagulant properties.
• The preferred site is the lower abdominal fat pad,
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
712
Appendi
2” (5.1 cm) beneath the umbilicus between the
iliac crests. This site is away from major muscles
and is not involved in muscular activity, as the
arms and legs are; thus, the possibility of
haematoma is reduced.
• Do not administer any injections within 2” of a
scar, a bruise, or the umbilicus.
• Use a ½ inch, 25 or 26-gauge needle with air,
which prevents any leakage of heparin into the
intradermal layers when the needle is inserted and
when the needle is withdrawn, thus minimizing
the possibility of a haematoma.
• Do not aspirate to check for blood return when
giving heparin because it may cause bleeding into
tissue at the site.
• Do not massage the site after the injection to avoid
haemorrhages or bruises.
• Alternate sites for subsequent injections.
Guidelines for insulin administration
• To establish more consistent blood levels, rotate
insulin injection sites within anatomic regions.
Absorption varies from one region to another.
Preferred insulin injection sites are the arms,
abdomen, thighs and buttocks. Make sure the type
of insulin, dose, and syringe are correct.
• When combining insulin in a syringe, make sure
they are compatible. Regular insulin can be mixed
with other insulins. Protamine insulin zinc
suspension (Semilente insulin) cannot be mixed
with isophane insulin suspension (NPH). Follow
hospital policy regarding which insulin to draw
up first.
• Do not mix insulins of different purities or origins.
• Before drawing up insulin suspension, gently roll
and invert the bottle to ensure even drug particle
distribution. Don’t shake the bottle because this
can cause foam or bubbles to develop in the
syringe.
• Do not aspirate for blood return; it is not necessary.
3.
INTRAMUSCULAR
ADMINISTRATION
The drug is injected into muscle tissue, usually
deep muscle, such as the gluteus or deltoid
(bioavailability <100%).
The rate of absorption depends on the
vascularity of the muscle site, the lipid
solubility of the drug, and the formulation
matrix. Intramuscular absorption is similar to
but more rapid than subcutaneous absorption
because of increased blood flow to the muscles.
Entry of the drug into the circulation is slower
than with I.V. administration.
Like the S.C. route, the peak effect is generally
much less than with I.V. administration but the
duration of action is generally longer because
of the slower release into the circulation.
The maximum injection volume is
approximately 2-5 ml.
Advantages of I.M. administration
1)It is commonly and frequently ordered for
medications that irritate subcutaneous tissue e.g.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
penicillin and paraldehyde.
2)The speed of absorption is faster than with oral
and subcutaneous routes because of the greater
blood supply to the muscles.
3)This route can take a larger volume of fluid
without discomfort than subcutaneous tissues,
although the amount varies among people, chiefly
with muscle size and condition.
4)The sites for intramuscular routes are many, so
different sites can be chosen depending on the
amount of drug to be given.
5)This route is recommended for patients who are
uncooperative or can’t take medication orally; and
for drugs that are altered by digestive juices.
6)It allows less painful administration of irritating
drugs because muscular tissue has fewer sensory
nerve endings.
7)It is convenient for both the patient and the nurse.
Disadvantages
1) Not all drugs are used for this route; oral and
intravenous routes are preferred for administration
of drugs that are poorly absorbed by muscle tissue
such as phenytoin, digoxin, chlordiazepoxide,
diazepam and haloperidol.
2) The needle may enter blood vessel accidentally
while the drug is being injected causing the drug
to go into blood circulation and forming an
embolus.
3) It is contraindicated in patients with impaired
coagulation mechanisms and in patients with
occlusive peripheral vascular disease, oedema and
shock, because these conditions impair peripheral
absorption.
Intramuscular injection sites
Selecting the appropriate site for an
ntramuscular injection is critical. Not only
should a large, healthy muscle be used, but also
he site should have no large nerves or blood
vessels and be free of infection and abrasions.
When a person is to receive several injections,
t is essential to alternate sites to avoid
overusing and irritating one muscle. For babies
and very young children, the quadriceps
muscles on the anterior and lateral aspects of
he thighs are the sites of choice. The gluteal
muscles of babies and children who cannot yet
walk are not sufficiently well developed to
receive injections. The proximity of the large
sciatic nerve and the danger of damaging it
usually militate against placing injections in the
gluteal muscles of children younger than 3
years.
The site for an I.M injection must be chosen
carefully, taking into account the patient’s
general physical status and the purpose of the
njection. I.M. injection should not be
administered at inflamed, oedematous or
rritated sites or at those containing moles,
birthmarks, scar tissue or other lesions.
The most common site is dorsogluteal, which
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
is the thick muscle of the buttock. Commonly
used for adult. Not recommended for children
below the age of 3 because the muscle is no
developed enough to prevent injury to the
sciatic nerve. Position the patient flat on the
stomach, with toes pointed inward and arms
apart and flexed toward the head. The injection
site must be carefully chosen to avoid striking
the sciatic nerve, major blood vessels or bone
To give an injection in this site, divide the
buttocks into imaginary quadrants. The vertica
line extends from the crest of the ilium to the
gluteal fold. The horizontal line extends from
the medial fold to the lateral aspect of the
buttock. Locate the upper outer aspect of the
upper outer quadrant. It is important to palpate
the crest of the ilium so that the site chosen is
high enough. Visual calculations alone can
result in an injection that is too low and tha
can injure the patient.
Other sites are:
Ventrogluteal (Gluteus minimus)  - Suitable
for all patients because it is relatively free from
large nerves and fatty tissue. Position the
patient on   his back or side.
Vastus lateralis is situated at the anterior latera
aspect of the thigh. Suitable for all patients
especially the children because it is wel
developed and has few major blood vessels and
nerves. Position the patient in bed sitting up or
lying flat
Rectus femoris is on the anterior aspect of the
thigh. Mainly used for self-injection because
of its accessibility. Position the patient in bed
sitting up or lying flat.
Deltoid and triceps are on the lateral aspect of
the upper arm. Seldom used because the muscle
is small and can take only small volumes of
medication; also dangerously near the radia
nerve. Position the patient in bed sitting uprigh
or lying flat.
Procedure for intramuscular
administration
• Wash hands using a surgical hand wash before
gathering the necessary equipment to avoid
transmitting microorganisms to the patient.
• Assemble the following items: the medication card
or the patient’s chart; the sterile medication eithe
in ampoule or vial; sterile disposable syringe and
needle (Use appropriate size of syringe, which i
usually 2-5ml. A large muscle such as gluteus
medius requires 20-23-gauge needle, 1½ 3 inche
long whereas deltoid muscle requires smaller 23
to 25-gauge needle,5/8 to 1 inch long); alcohol
pads, gloves, etc.
• Check the medication orders. Prepare the correc
dosage of the drug from a vial or ampoule.
• Identify the patient and explain the procedure
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
713
istration
• Select the site with adequate muscle mass. The
skin surface over the site should be free of bruises,
abrasions and infections. Determine if the size of
muscle is appropriate to the amount of medication
to be injected. An average adult’s deltoid muscle
can usually absorb 0.5 to 2 ml of drug whereas
gluteus medius can absorb 1 to 5 ml. If injection
is to be frequent, sites should be alternated.
• Provide privacy if patient will be exposed.
• Clean the site with an antiseptic swab using a
circular motion, start at the center and move
outward about 5 cm
• Remove the needle cover and withdraw the
prescribed amount of medication. Invert the
syringe and expel any air that has accidentally
entered the syringe
• Use the non-dominant hand to spread the skin at
the site. Holding the syringe between the thumb
and forefinger, pierce the skin quickly at a 90º
angle and insert the needle into the muscle.
• Aspirate by pulling back on the plunger, if blood
appears in the syringe, withdraw the needle,
discard the syringe, and prepare a new injection.
• If blood does not appear, inject the medication
steadily and slowly, holding the syringe steady.
• After the injection, withdraw the needle quickly.
Massage the site lightly while applying slight
pressure with alcohol pad to spread the medication
over a greater area. Avoid massaging the site when
you want to slow absorption or when you are
injecting an extremely irritating medication.
• Dispose the used needles and syringe. Needle
covers should be re-applied
• Assist patient to a comfortable position
• Wash hands
• Record the medication given, dosage, time, route,
site and any complaints by the patient, and your
signature.
• Assess the effectiveness of the medication up to
30 minutes after the injection or as appropriate,
depending on the medication.
Giving I.M. Injection to infants
Infants and children up to about 5 years of age
must be restrained for parenteral injections.
They require extra hands to help in restraining
them so that they will not injure themselves,
because quick movement once the needle has
been inserted could break the needle shaft.
Injections are contraindicated in certain sites
like dorsogluteal and ventrogluteal muscles and
the only acceptable site for I.M. injection is
the anterior thigh (Vastus lateralis) and for
subcutaneous route is anterior thigh and the
deltoid area.
In preparing for an infant injection, put into
consideration the size of the syringe and the
gauge of the needle, and then calculate the
dosages using any formula that is appropriate
to the age and weight of the child.
Clean the anterior thigh with methylated spirit
and allow to dry. Restrain the knee of the
selected leg with your non-dominant hand; lean
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
714
Appendi
your body weight over the child’s body to
prevent his torso-from moving. Use your
dominant hand to administer the injection. Ask
for assistance to restrain them, do not under
estimate their strength. With older children, you
must ask for help. When assisting, always ask
for their permission; this will ensure
cooperation, e.g., “Let me help you hold still”.
This will elicit more cooperation than forcing
them to do something unwillingly. Praise and
comfort them afterward. Do not ask parents to
restrain their children because some pain is
associated with injection, and their role in this
case will be contrary to what role they are
expected to play, i.e. protecting them rather than
causing pain, Hand the child to the parents
immediately after the injection to be comforted.
How to use the Z-track method
A Z-track intramuscular injection is a special
technique used to administer intramuscular
medications that are highly irritating to
subcutaneous and skin tissues. The technique
is the same as the technique for an intamuscular
injection except that the skin and subcutaneous
tissue at the site of injection are pulled about
2.5 to 3.5 cm to one side of the site before the
needle is inserted at 90º angle. This will ensure
that the medication enters the muscle tissue.
Aspirate for blood return and if none appears,
inject the drug slowly. Wait for 10 seconds
before removing the needle; this is to ensure
dispersion of medication as the muscle tissues
relax. The needle is withdrawn slowly; then
release the displaced skin and subcutaneous
tissue. When the skin returns to its normal
position, the needle track is sealed off by
pulling the patient’s skin to minimize
subcutaneous irritation or discolouration. The
site is not massaged and do not allow the patient
to wear a tight fitting garment over the site
because it might cause seepage into the delicate
tissue and cause irritation.
Reducing the pain of intramuscular
injection
This can be achieved by holding a syringe for
injection in the same manner as you would hold
a dart. Use a quick thrust, with the needle at a
steep angle (90º) to guarantee that it pierces
deeply. Do not be concerned that the needle
will pierce too deeply. If the site and length of
needle are appropriate, this will not occur.
Never use a blunt needle when there is usually
a skin resistance to even a sharp needle. A
greater concern is that with too soft a thrust,
the needle will not pierce the skin and you will
have to attempt the procedure again after
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
changing the needle. Insert the needle through
he skin as rapidly as possible. A needle passing
rapidly through tissue does not cause pain
whereas a needle pushed slowly does.
Pain can be relieved also by putting ice to a
site for a few minutes prior to an injection or
by massaging the area for few seconds
mmediately after injection. Note that
massaging is contraindicated in certain
njection procedures like heparin, insulin, z-
rack injection, etc. Counter irritation will help
decrease the pain because nerve endings at the
site will then transmit the feeling of rubbing or
cold rather than the stretched or painful
sensation.
Also if the patient is relaxed, there is less
ension on the tissue. Relaxation can be
achieved by proper positioning, or diverting the
patient’s attention by communicating with the
patient. Most importantly is the confidence of
he nurse handling the procedure. This will
allay patient’s fear and anxiety.
4.
INTRAVENOUS ADMINISTRATION
This is administration of medicine or fluid
hrough the vein. It is the most rapid way to
achieve a drug’s effect because it bypasses
absorption. 100% of the drug is delivered
directly into the circulation thereby producing
mmediate therapeutic effect (bioavailability =
100%). Any adverse effects such as
anaphylaxis also occur rapidly. With I.V. route,
t is impossible to recall an inadvertent
overdose.
Bolus: The entire dose is administered rapidly,
producing a high plasma concentration and
usually, the most rapid effect. Injection volume
s limited only by the patient’s size (i.e., plasma
volume) and the properties (i.e., toxicities) of
he drug or fluid administered.
Infusion: The drug is given at a constant rate.
Constant rate I.V. infusion maintains a
relatively constant plasma drug concentration.
Injection volume is unlimited.
IV route is indicated in the following
conditions:
• For immediate treatment of life-threatening
conditions such as shock;
• To deliver drugs that can’t be given by any other
route, such as dopamine;
• To deliver large doses of medication;
• When other routes are not possible, e.g. in
unconscious patient;
• When using potentially harmful drugs which can
damage subcutaneous or intramuscular layer.
IV route should be avoided if the patient can
swallow and an oral form is available. Patients
with blood coagulation disorders should not
receive IV therapy unless for the treatment of
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
the coagulation disorder.
In I.V. administration, medication is injected
by piercing the skin and sliding the needle of
the syringe into an evident available vein
Before piercing the skin, a tourniquet must have
been tied round the limb, which will have to
be removed immediately a vein is got. I
requires a new puncture of the vein with each
administration. When veins are entered too
many times at the same site, inflammation and
some oozing of blood into the subcutaneous
tissue may occur leading to haematoma and
blocking of the site.
There are other potential hazards in giving I.V
medications. Infection and rapid, severe
reactions to the medication. To preven
infection, sterile technique is used during al
aspects of I.V. administration procedures. To
safeguard the patient against severe reaction
the nurse must administer the drug slowly
taking several minutes and following the
manufacturer’s recommendations. The patien
is assessed closely during the administration
and the medication is discontinued immediately
if an untoward reaction occurs. Common signs
of an adverse reaction are: Noisy respirations
changes in pulse rate, chills, nausea and
headache. If any adverse signs occur, the nurse
notifies the most senior nurse in the ward or
charge nurse who will in turn report to the
physician.
The patient is also assessed for signs of
problems associated with I.V. therapy, such as
an infection at the I.V. site or fluid infiltration
Various intravenous administration
methods
Selection of an I.V. delivery method depends
upon the therapy’s purpose and duration; the
patient’s diagnosis, age and health history; and
the condition of his veins.
Intravenous drug administration can be done
in five ways in case of an existing intravenous
line:
1) Directly into a bottle or bag of intravenous fluid
2) Into a volume-controlled chamber in the tubing
3) Directly into the lower tubing at a bolus injection
site;
4) Directly into a heparin lock;
5) By a separate bag of solution (a piggyback).
(1)
Directly into a bottle or bag of
intravenous fluid:
Medications are put directly into a bottle or bag
of intravenous fluid. It then means the
medication will flow along with the fluid, and
will last as long as the fluid lasts i.e. if the fluid
is supposed to run for six hours, the medication
will run for that period of time e.g. vitamin B
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
715
istration
complex, syntocinon.  It’s quite advantageous
because it is gradual in onset, and it can quickly
be put off and the effect of the medication
stopped.
(2)
Into a volume-controlled chamber in
the tubing:
Medications in this case are injected into the
volume-controlled chamber in the tubing. There
are different volume controlled sets and they
are designed to deliver a variety of different-
sized drops (10, 15, 20, 50 or 60 drops). This
is a calibrated chamber (e.g., Buretrol, Metriset,
and Soluset), 100 to 250 ml in size that is filled
with intravenous fluid from the solution bag
ahead. The clamp above the volume-control
chamber is closed after a set amount of fluid
has filled the chamber so that no more fluid
can enter it. It serves as a safety device in case
the lower regulating clamp is released
accidentally or deliberately by a child, the
patient will receive no more fluid than that
contained in the chamber. I.V. therapy is not
done for children under 2 years of age without
using such a safety feature to eliminate the
danger of circulatory overload. They are also
useful if the solution contains a medication such
as potassium or heparin to ensure that a large
volume of a potentially dangerous medication
is not accidentally administered too rapidly.
(3)
Directly into the lower tubing at a
bolus injection site:
For this method, the medication is injected into
the lower tubing at bolus injection site; the
infusion is clamped in order to inject the
medication after which the infusion will be
unclamped to allow the flow. The drug is put
directly in the bloodstream and the infusion will
help to expedite the action. It can be used in
emergency and when a drug is to be
administered at frequent intervals.
(4)
Directly into the heparin lock:
This is also called an intermittent infusion
device. A heparin lock consists of either a steel
winged tip needle with tubing that ends in a
resealable rubber injection port or a catheter
with injection cap attached. Filled with dilute
heparin to prevent blood clot formation, the
device maintains venous access in patients
receiving I.V. medication regularly and
intermittently, but not requiring continuous
infusion of fluids.
A heparin lock proves superior to a keep-vein-
open line because it minimizes the risk of fluid
overload and electrolyte imbalance. It also cuts
costs and reduces the risk of contamination by
eliminating I.V. solution containers and
administration sets; increases patient’s comfort
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
716
Appendi
and mobility; reduces patient’s anxiety; and if
inserted in a large vein, allows collection of
multiple blood samples without repeated
venipuncture.
(5)
By a separate bag of solution (a
piggyback):
This is drug infusion through a secondary I.V.
line. A piggyback set includes a small I.V.
container, short tubing, and a macro drip
system. This set connects to the primary line’s
upper Y port, also known as a piggyback port.
A piggyback set is used solely for intermittent
drug administration. Antibiotics are most
commonly administered by intermittent
(piggyback) infusion. To make this set work,
the primary I.V. container must be positioned
below the piggyback container (provision is
made by the manufacturer for an extension
hook for that purpose).
The greater hydrostatic pressure in the
piggyback container due to the raised position
will cause the fluid to infuse.
A secondary set may be used in place of the
piggyback set as an additive set. A secondary
set includes an I.V. container of any size, long
tubing, and either a micro drip or a macro drip
system. The set connects into the primary line’s
lower Y port, which is also called the secondary
port. A secondary set is used to administer drugs
intermittently or simultaneously with a primary
solution.
Do not allow an infusion bag to be completely
empty so that air will not enter into the vein.
Choosing the venipuncture site
Venipuncture involves piercing a vein with a
needle and inserting the venipuncture device
for the purpose of an I.V. therapy or collection
of blood samples.
In both adults and children, it may be done at
the antecubital space in the basilic, median
cubital, or cephalic vein, or from one of the
veins on the back of the hand (dorsal,
metacarpal, basilic, or cephalic). Even for
newborns, these sites are available and easy to
use for a skilled person. If the veins in the hands
or arms cannot be used, either because they are
collapsed due to hypotension or damaged due
to burns, the femoral vein can be used although
infection and phlebitis are common with this
site.
Assess the point where blood will be drawn
for skin lesions or erythema (red and tender
areas that suggest infection). Do not penetrate
such areas to reach veins; doing so might push
microorganisms from the surface lesion into the
blood stream, causing blood infection
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
(septicaemia). Determine whether the person
s on any medication that interferes with blood
clotting e.g. heparin. If so more careful
compression is necessary to stop blood flow
after the procedure.
How to perform venipuncture
• Wash your hand, identify client and explain
procedure to him.
• Assess client’s status and analyze plan according
to the client’s needs.
• Gather all the requirements including injection
pack, tourniquet, appropriate size needle and
syringe, adhesive plaster, gloves, etc.
• Locate the best puncture site, which may be the
back of the hand (antecubital space) by
observation and palpation. Choose as distal a site
as possible to preserve remainder of vein. Select
a vein large enough to accommodate needle.
• Apply tourniquet in a way that it can be removed
with one hand after procedure and proximal to
venipuncture site. If adult ask client to make a
fist. Tap vein and stroke vein toward heart to
enhance distension.
• Put on your gloves; clean the site with methylated
spirit using circular motion. Place thumb distal to
puncture site and pull skin taut over site.
• Insert needle, bevel side up, at 30º angle about ½
inch distal to point at which needle will enter vein;
decrease angle slightly and push the needle into
the vein, following the course of the vein until
when blood appears in syringe. Slowly and
steadily aspirate desired amount of blood or inject
the medication if giving bolus injection.
• Remove tourniquet, place dry compress on needle
tip; apply gentle pressure and withdraw needle,
holding it flat to skin surface.
• Put specimen into the suitable container, allowing
blood to run gently down the side of the tube.
Label appropriately and send to the laboratory for
analysis. Dispose of needles, syringes and
anything contaminated with blood into the sluice
room. Do not bend or break the needles before
disposal.
• Be certain that there is no oozing of blood at the
puncture site. Apply adhesive plaster snugly to
maintain faint pressure.
• Evaluate the effectiveness, efficiency, safety, cost
and comfort of procedure. Document the entire
procedure.
Avoiding common I.V problems
It involves the following:
• Careful preparation of the medication. nUsing
aseptic procedure to administer I.V therapy.
• Using correct size of needle.
• Choosing an appropriate site for the therapy.
• Proper monitoring and calculation of rate of flow
so as not to overload the heart.
• Stop the I.V. therapy immediately if swelling
occurs at the site of administration.
• Never use a device for more than stipulated time.
• Assess the site properly for any signs of
tenderness, swelling, scar, etc.
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
Paediatric I.V therapy
Paediatric I.V. therapy is almost the same as
adult except that children are extremely
frightened; explain the procedure to the child
There is need for splint to restrain the
movement of the hand especially at the elbow
or the wrist. If older child, evaluate whether
the child can hold still or not. If not ask for
help.
I.V. therapy is not administered to children less
than 2 years of age without using safety
measures such as volume control sets, to
eliminate the danger of circulatory overload
For these children, fill the volume-contro
chamber with no more fluid than they are to
receive in an hour. This calibrated chamber is
known as Buretrol or Soluset; often used in
paediatric wards. It is a minidrip chamber. I
supplies 60 drops per milliliter.
Risks of peripheral I.V. therapy
There are local and systemic complications.
Local complications such as:
Phlebitis, which may be caused by poor blood
flow around venipuncture device or friction
from catheter movement in vein or
venipuncture device left in vein for too long
The patient will manifest with puffy area over
the vein, and elevated temperature.
Extravasation, which is as a result of device
dislodging from vein or perforated vein. Patien
will manifest with swelling at and above I.V
site (may extend along entire limb); pain
discomfort or burning at the site (may be
painless at times).
Occlusion, which is caused by interrupted I.V
flow or I.V. line clamped for too long. Patien
will complain of discomfort at insertion site.
Haematoma as a result of inadequate pressure
applied when catheter is discontinued. It also
occurs when vein is punctured through opposite
wall at time of insertion. Patient will manifes
with tenderness at the site and bruised area
around the site.
Thrombosis, which is caused by injury to
endothelial cells of vein wall, allowing platelets
to adhere and thrombus to form. It results in
painful, reddened and swollen vein, or sluggish
or stopped I.V. flow.
Thrombophlebitis, which results from
thrombosis and inflammation. There is severe
discomfort or hardened, swollen and reddened
vein.
Nerve tendon or ligament damage, which is
caused by improper venipuncture technique
resulting in injury to surrounding nerves
tendons or ligaments or tight taping or improper
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
717
istration
splinting with arm board. Patient will complain
of extreme pain similar to electrical shock when
nerve is punctured, numbness and muscle
contraction.
Systemic complications
Circulatory overload, which could be as a
result of flow rate too rapid, or miscalculation
of fluid requirement. Patient will manifest with
discomfort, neck vein engorgement, respiratory
distress, increased blood pressure, increased
difference between fluid intake and output.
Systemic infections (Septicaemia or
Bacteraemia), which may be due to failure to
maintain aseptic technique during insertion or
site care, prolonged indwelling time of device,
weak immune system. Patient will show signs
and symptoms of fever, chills and malaise for
no apparent reason
Air embolism can be caused by an empty
solution container resulting in the added
container pushing air down the I.V. line. The
patient will manifest with respiratory distress,
unequal breath sounds, weak pulse, increased
central venous pressure, and loss of
consciousness, decreased blood pressure.
Allergic reactions, which can be caused by
allergens such as medications and patient will
react by having itching, watery eyes and nose,
bronchospasm, wheezing, urticarial rash;
anaphylactic reaction may occur within minutes
or up to 1 hour after exposure (flushing, chills,
anxiety, agitation, palpitations, cardiac arrest).
Central venous infusion
Pros and cons of central venous infusion
Pros
• It allows monitoring of C.V. pressure, which is an
indication of circulatory function.
• It permits aspiration of blood samples for
diagnostic tests
• It also allows administration of I.V. fluids in large
amounts, if necessary in emergencies or when
decreased peripheral circulation causes peripheral
veins to collapse
• Used when prolonged I.V. therapy reduces the
number of accessible peripheral veins
• Also utilized when solutions must be diluted
• Used for irritating or hypertonic fluids such as
total parenteral nutrition (TPN) solutions
• Can be employed when a patient requires long
term venous access because repeated blood
samples can be drawn through it; the C.V. line
decreases the patient’s anxiety and preserves or
restores peripheral veins.
Cons
• It increases the risk of complications, such as
pneumothorax, sepsis, thrombus formation, and
perforation of adjacent organ
• It is more expensive than peripheral I.V. catheter.
• It may decrease patient’s mobility.
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
718
Appendi
• It requires more time and skill to insert than a
peripheral I.V. device.
Central venous infusion sites
A central venous (C.V.) line is a sterile catheter
made of polyurethane, poly vinyl chloride
(PVC) or silicone rubber (silastic). It is inserted
through a major vein such as
subclavian vein or less common jugular.  The
catheter may terminate in the superior vena
cava or in the right atrium.
How to perform central line insertion
• Gather the Equipments: shave preparation kit,
sterile gloves and gowns, linen saver pad, blanket,
sterile towel and drape, masks, cotton swabs,
iodine, methylated spirit, hydrogen peroxide,
antibiotic ointment, syringes and needle, injectable
lignocaine, 5% dextrose in water, suture material,
two 14G or 16G C.V catheters, I.V solution with
administration set prepared for use, infusion pump
or controller, sterile scissors, sterile gauze, heparin
or normal saline flushes, adhesive tape, X-ray
machine (portable)
• Before insertion of a C.V. line, confirm catheter
type and size with the doctor. Set up the I.V.
solution and prime the administration set, using
strict aseptic technique. Attach the line to the
infusion pump or controller if ordered. Recheck
all connections to make sure they’re tight. Notify
radiology department for a portable X-ray
machine.
• Wash your hand thoroughly to prevent the spread
of microorganisms.
• Reinforce the doctor’s explanation of the
procedure and its related complications in terms
the patient can understand; and answer the
patient’s questions.
• Ensure that the patient has signed a consent form,
if necessary, and check his history for
hypersensitivity to iodine or the local anaesthetic.
• Place the patient in Trendelenburg’s position to
dilate the veins and reduce the risk of air
embolism.
• For subclavian insertion, place a rolled blanket
length-wise between the shoulders to increase
venous distention.
• For jugular insertion, place a rolled blanket under
the opposite shoulder to extend the neck, making
anatomic landmarks more visible. Place a
mackintosh under the appropriate area to prevent
soiling the bed.
• Turn the patient’s head away from the site to
prevent possible contamination from airborne
pathogens and to make the site more accessible.
• Prepare the insertion site. Make sure the skin is
free of hair because hair can harbour
microorganisms. Do this in evening before the
procedure.
• Sterilize the trolley to be used.
• Put on a mask and sterile gloves and gown and
clean the area around the insertion site with swabs
soaked in iodine or methylated spirit, working in
a circular motion outward from the site to avoid
reintroducing contaminants.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
8: Guide to drug administration
• After the doctor puts on a sterile mask, gown and
gloves and drapes the area to create a sterile field,
open the packaging of 3 ml syringe and 25G needle
and present it to the doctor, using sterile technique.
• Wipe the top of the lignocaine vial with
methylated spirit and invert it. The doctor fills the
3 ml syringe and injects the anaesthetic into the
site.
• Open the packaging of the catheter and give it to
the doctor using sterile technique. The doctor then
inserts the catheter.
• During this time, prepare the I.V. administration
set for immediate attachment to the catheter hub.
Ask the patient to perform Valsalva’s manoeuver
(forced exhalation against a closed airway) while
the doctor attaches the I.V. line to the catheter hub.
This increases intrathoracic pressure and reduces
the possibility of an air embolus formation during
the insertion or removal of a C.V. catheter.
• After the doctor attaches the I.V. line to the catheter
hub, set the flow rate at a keep-vein-open rate to
maintain venous access. The doctor then sutures
the catheter in place
• After an X-ray confirm correct catheter placement,
set the flow rate as ordered.
• Use normal saline solution to remove dried blood
that could harbour microorganisms and apply
iodine over the site. Place antibiotic ointment at
the site if hospital policy directs, secure the
catheter with adhesive tape, and apply an
occlusive, sterile 4" x 4" gauze pad. Expect some
serosanguineous  drainage during the first 24
hours. Label the dressing with the time and date
of catheter insertion and catheter length (if not
imprinted).
Teaching Valsalva’s manoeuver
Instruct patient to take a deep breath and hold
t, and then bear down for 10 seconds. Then
ell patient to exhale and breath quietly. This
manoeuver raises intrathoracic pressure from
normal level of -3 to -4 mmHg to levels of 60
mmHg or higher. It also slows the pulse rate,
decreases the return of blood to the heart and
ncreases venous pressure. This is
contraindicated in patients with increased
ntracranial pressure and patients who are not
alert or cooperative.
7.
Other routes of drug administration
(e) Intra-arterial administration
The drug is injected directly into a specific
artery to achieve a high drug concentration in
a specific tissue before drug distribution occurs
hroughout the body. This route is used mainly
for diagnostic agents and some antineoplastic
agents.
(f) Intrathecal administration
The drug is injected into the spinal fluid
(sometimes used for antibiotics).
(g) Intra-Osseous administration
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMDEX 2006
Appendix 8: Guide to drug adm
Intraosseous infusion may be indicated in a
severe emergency when intravenous access has
proved impossible. It can be used to administer
anything that would normally be given
intravenously, i.e. fluids, whole blood, packed
cells, drugs. Drug absorption and effectiveness
are the same as by the I. V. route. The use of
intraosseous route is usually limited to very
young children because the vascular red
marrow is replaced by the less vascular yellow
marrow at about age 5.
(h) Intracardiac administration
The drug is injected directly into the heart.
(i) Intra-articular administration
This is injection into a joint space.
(j) Intrasynovial administration
This is injection into the joint fluid.
(k) Intraspinal administration
This is injection into the spinal column.
(l) Hypodermoclysis
This involves injection of large volumes of a
solution into subcutaneous tissue to provide a
continuous, abundant drug supply; used
occasionally for antibiotic administration in
children.
References:
1) Photoguide to Drug Administration,
Springhouse Corp., 1992.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
719
istration
2) Leon Shargel, et al, Comprehensive Pharmacy
Review, Williams & Wilkins, 3rd      Edition,
1997.
3) Gibson John, The Nurses Materia Medica,
Blackwell Scientific Publication, 6th Edition,
1984.
4) Grover, J.K, Pharmacology for Nurses, C.B.S.
Publishers & Distributors, 1st Edition, 1989.
5) Kemp, B.B, et al, Fundamentals of Nursing,
Scott Foresman and Company Ltd, 2nd Edition,
1995.
6) Kozier, B. and Erb, G., Fundamentals of
Nursing, Addison Wesley Publishing
Company, 2nd Edition, 1983.
7) Quinless, F.W. and Blaver, R.F., Nursing
Procedures: Student’s Version, Springhouse
Publishing Company, 2000.
8) Trounce, J., Clinical Pharmacology for Nurses,
Churchill Living stone, 4th Edition, 1993.
9) Vallerani April Hazard, Nursing
Pharmacology; Springhouse Publishing
Company, First Edition, 1988.
10)Walsh Mike, Watson’s Clinical Nursing and
Related Sciences, Bailliere Tindall, First
Edition, 1997.
11)Billings Hazel, Practical Procedures for
Nurses, Bailliere Tindall, Third Edition, 1991.
12)Jones Bernard R., Pharmacology for Students
& Pupil Nurses and Students in Associated
Professions, William Heinemann Medical
Books Limited, Third Edition, 1988.
RETURN
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------